# Latent-Taxonomic-Signatures
To explain the sudden appearance of species and a paucity of evidence for constant-rate gradualism, theories such as punctuated equilibrium have introduced the concept that evolution has more than one gear. In this theory, rapidly evolving populations enter stasis once speciation is completed and the resultant species become adapted. Instead of using traditional protein sequence alignment based methods to examine models for the evolution of species, here the frequency of 3-peptide motifs shared between otherwise unrelated species proteomes was determined using Latent Semantic Analysis. A positive correlation between semantic similarity of proteomes and species taxonomy was discovered. This new proteome feature was named Latent Semantic Signatures. Thus, any arbitrarily selected set of proteins would reflect the overall proteome signature for a given species, which was not reflected in any other genome level biases. Even proteins regarded as taxonomically restricted (e.g. orphan) were found to display these signatures. Evidence is also provided that shared adaptations (e.g. virus-host specificity) that are not restricted to single species also display latent proteome signatures and, that these proteome signatures can be used for functional discrimination with high degree of accuracy (e.g. between venomous and non-venomous animals). Thus, the discovery of latent signatures at the level of a species proteome independent of genome bias strengthens support for the punctuated equilibrium hypothesis.

The python code herein consists of various scripts used to process species proteome data originating from NCBI "nr" database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/refseq/about/nonredundantproteins/). Numerals at the end of each script indicate the order in which the code should be executed (starting from the smaller numerals). This pipeline has numerous dependancies on external libraries (standalone BLAST+, DIAMOND, ETE3 Taxonomy, Gensim etc.), and each script should be executed only after all dependancies listed in the beginning of the script have been properly installed.  

If there are some issues with code execution, please contact me by sending me an email on astar@pbf.hr with the title "LTS code issue" and state the script you have trouble excecuting. All the scripts are meant to be executed within the same directory.

The programs herein were executed on an x86_64 Debian based Linux Ubuntu 18.04.5 LTS server with 2 Intel Xeon E5-2650 2.00GHz CPUs, 8 cores per socket and 2 Threads per core and 256 GB RAM, kernel release 5.4.0-110-generic with ample storage.

Scripts having a "_jupyter" suffix were utilized for generation of Figures, based on the output of the previously described scripts. For this purpose, Jupyter notebook version 5.0.0 was also installed on the same server machine and started in the same directory all script output has been generated. Gensim 
v. 4.0.1, Matplotlib v. 3.4.1 (0.1.2 -inline), Scipy v. 1.6.3, Numpy v. 1.20.2 and Scikit-learn v. 0.24.2 are some of the libraries this code is heavily dependant upon.

These are the main scripts used to generate data which is included in manuscript entitled "Venoms, viruses and orphan proteins - deciphering species proteomes through semantics using Latent Taxonomic Signatures". Because language modelling can be a daunting task, there is a web application called "Matrix of Life" deploying the exact LSA model described in the manuscript and generated using these scripts. Therefore, even without installing and running these scripts anyone with Internet and a browser can use and test it freely with some minor restrictions on the dataset size. The web accessible LSA species model app is available at http://matrix.pbf.hr/
